1. Andres visits Beth's home to view a supposedly valuable painting. Andres likes the painting so much, he agrees to buy it from Beth. As Andres is leaving, he slips and falls on Beth's icy sidewalk. Andres sues Beth for negligence, seeking $20,000 in damages for the injuries she sustained in the fall. Andres also wants to sue Beth for breach of contract, after it turns out that the painting, for which Andres paid B $60,000, is a worthless fake. May Andres include both claims in the same suit?
a) No, because the two claims do not arise from the same transaction or occurrence. 
b) No, because the federal rules do not permit joinder of tort and contract claims in the same action.
* c) Yes, because joinder is proper and the requirements of diversity jurisdiction are satisfied. 
d) Yes, but only if the court determines that the two claims share a common question of law or fact.   

QUESTIONS 2 & 3 ARE BASED ON THE FOLLOWING FACTS:
Andrea, a citizen of New York, and Bart, a citizen of New Jersey, own neighboring country homes in Pennsylvania. There is a gap in the fence separating their property. Bart's pet pig has repeatedly slipped through the gap and bathed in a creek that runs through Andrea's property, fouling the creek with its droppings. After this happens for the tenth time, an enraged Andrea shoots and kills the pig. Hearing the shots, Bart rushes into Andrea's yard, tackles Andrea, and clobbers Andrea over the head with a garden shovel. 

2. Andrea sues Bart, seeking $75,000 for the injuries resulting from the assault by Bart. Andrea also wishes to sue Bart for the cost of cleaning up the mess that Bart's pig left in the creek. May Andrea include that claim in the same suit? 

* a) Yes, because joinder is proper and the requirements of diversity jurisdiction are satisfied. 
b) Yes, because the two claims arise from the same series of occurrences involving the pig. 
c) No, because a plaintiff may not combine claims for personal injuries and property damage to satisfy the statutory amount in controversy requirement for diversity jurisdiction. 
d) No, unless Andrea's claim for the cost of cleaning up the creek is based on the federal Clean Water Act. 

3. Assume that Andrea sues Bart for the injuries resulting from the assault by Bart, and that Andrea seeks more than $75,000 in damages. Bart wishes to assert two claims against Andrea: a claim for the loss Bart's pig (“Claim 1”), and a claim for damage to Bart's house that resulted when a tree in Andrea's yard fell and landed on Bart's roof (“Claim 2”). Which of the following is correct:

* a) Bart must assert Claim 1 as a counterclaim in Andrea's suit, and Bart may either assert Claim 2 as a counterclaim in Andrea's suit or assert it as a claim in a separate suit. 
b) Bart may assert Claim 1 as a counterclaim in Andrea's suit, but Bart may not assert Claim 2 as a counterclaim in Andrea's suit. 
c) Bart must assert both claims as counterclaims in Andrea's suit. 
d) Bart may not assert either claim as a counterclaim in Andrea's suit. 

4. Anton sues Beverly for breach of contract. Anton also has an unrelated claim against Claire, Beverly's spouse, for defamation. Anton wants to sue Beverly & Claire together in the same suit. Would joinder of Beverly & Claire as co-defendants in the same action be proper? (Assume that the federal court would have subject matter jurisdiction over each claim.)
a) Yes, because as a married couple Beverly & Claire have common interests in any claims in which they are parties. 
b) Yes, if the court concludes that the interests of judicial economy and convenience to the parties would be served by deciding the claims together. 
* c) No, because the claims against Beverly & Claire arise from different transactions and occurrences.
d) No, because a plaintiff may not join co-defendants where the plaintiff asserts a contract claim against one defendant and a tort claim against the other defendant.

QUESTIONS 5-8 ARE BASED ON THE FOLLOWING FACTS:
Alice wants to remodel her home. To pay for the remodeling, Alice borrows money from Bank, which takes a mortgage on the property. Under the applicable state law, Bank holds title to the property until Alice has repaid the loan; in the event Alice defaults on the loan, Bank may foreclose on the property and recover the unpaid amount from the proceeds of the foreclosure sale. 
Alice then hires Carpenter and Electrician to perform the remodeling work. Under state law, each contractor has a lien on the property, meaning that, if Alice fails to pay them for the work, they may foreclose on the property and recover the unpaid amount from the proceeds of the foreclosure sale. 
Alice also hired Designer to decorate the home after the remodeling is completed. State law does not give Designer any lien or other interest in the property. In the event Alice fails to pay Designer for his work, Designer may sue for breach of contract, but would not be able to foreclose on the property to satisfy any uncollected judgment.

5. Carpenter and Electrician complete their work, but Alice, who has spent the loan funds on a lavish vacation, has no money left to pay either of them. If Carpenter and Electrician decide to enforce their liens through a foreclosure action, may they do so together as co-plaintiffs? (Assume the court would have subject matter jurisdiction.)
a) No, because their claims are based on different contracts and liens.
b) No, because their interests are adverse to one another. 
* c) Yes, because their claims arise out of related transactions and involve common questions of law and fact.
d) Yes, but only if they do not have any potential claims against one another arising from their work on Alice's house. 

6. Assume that Alice pays Carpenter, but not Electrician, for the work. Electrician then brings a foreclosure action to enforce her lien. Must Bank also be joined as a party in that action? (Assume there are no jurisdictional or procedural impediments to Bank's joinder.)

* a) Yes, because Bank has an interest in the property, and deciding the action in Bank's absence may impair Bank's ability to protect its interest.
b) Yes, but only if there is a statute explicitly giving Bank a right to intervene.
c) No, unless Electrician also has a claim against Bank. 
d) No, because a plaintiff is the master of the complaint, and is entitled to decide which parties to include and exclude. 

7. Alice also failed to pay Designer for his work on the house. If Electrician brings a foreclosure action to enforce her lien, must Designer be joined as a party in that action? (Assume there are no jurisdictional or procedural impediments to Designer's joinder.)

a) Yes, because if Designer is not joined in Electrician's suit, and Electrician prevails, Alice may have no other assets from which Designer can collect on a judgment against Alice. 
b) Yes, because the claims by Electrician and Designer arise out of the same series of transactions involving the remodeling project. 
* c) No, because Designer's interests would not be affected by the outcome of Electrician's suit.
d) No, because Designer's claim would raise questions of law and fact that are nor raised by Electrician's claim. 

8. In the scenario described in Question 7, may Designer intervene as a plaintiff against Alice in Electrician's suit? (Assume the court would have subject matter jurisdiction.)

* a) Yes, assuming the court regards Alice's contracts with Designer and Electrician as part of a series of transactions related to the remodeling job. 
b) Yes, because any creditor with a claim against Alice may intervene in a suit by another creditor, even if their claims arise from separate and unrelated transactions. 
c) No, unless a statute gives Alice an unconditional right to intervene. 
d) No, because Alice's debt to Electrician is secured by a lien in Alice's property, while Alice's debt to Designer is unsecured.

QUESTIONS 9 & 10 ARE BASED ON THE FOLLOWING FACTS: 
Albert, a lifelong resident of Alabama, takes out a life insurance policy issued by Consolidated Insurance Company, which is incorporated and has its sole place of business in Connecticut. The policy carries a benefit of $100,000 payable to Albert's spouse or other designated beneficiary upon his death. At the time he took out the policy, Albert was married to Carla. He later divorces Carla and marries Darla, to whom he remains married when he dies. Carla and Darla each claims to be the rightful beneficiary under the insurance policy, and each demands payment from Consolidated. 

9. Assume that Carla & Darla are both domiciled in Alabama. May Consolidated bring an action against Carla and Darla in the U.S. District Court for the District of Alabama, asking the court to determine which of them is entitled to collect the benefit under the policy?
a) No. The court lacks subject matter jurisdiction, because Carla and Darla are both citizens of Alabama. 
b) No, unless Consolidated also alleges that neither Carla nor Darla may collect the benefit because Albert committed suicide.  
c) Yes, but only if Consolidated deposits the $100,000 with the clerk of the court. 
* d) Yes, because this is a valid interpleader action and the court has diversity jurisdiction. 

10. Assume that Carla is domiciled in Alabama but Darla is domiciled in Massachusetts. Assume further that the benefit under the policy is only $50,000. May Consolidated bring an action against Carla and Darla in the U.S. District Court for the District of Massachusetts asking the court to determine which of them is entitled to collect the benefit under the policy?

a) No, because Carla lacks minimum contacts with Massachusetts.
b) No, because Consolidated and Darla are both citizens of Massachusetts. 
c) No, because the amount in controversy does not exceed $75,000
* d) Yes, provided Consolidated deposits the $50,000 with the clerk of court. 

11. Adina (a citizen of Illinois) agrees to sell a rare stamp to Bertha (a citizen of Wisconsin) for $80,000. Adina engages Charles (a citizen of Iowa) to act as an escrow agent for the transaction. She gives the stamp to Charles, telling him to keep it secure until Bertha tenders payment, after which he is to give Bertha the stamp. After notifying Bertha of this arrangement, Adina changes her mind and instructs Charles to hold on to the stamp until Adina gives further instructions. Bertha gives Charles a certified check for the agreed-upon amount, and requests that Charles hand over the stamp. Charles contacts Adina, who tells him not to give the stamp to Bertha, and to bring it to Adina's lawyer instead. Unsure of what to do, Charles holds on to the stamp. Bertha sues Charles, seeking an injunction compelling Charles to deliver the stamp to Adina. May Adina intervene in this action? (Assume the court would have subject matter jurisdiction.) 

* a) Yes, assuming she claims an interest in the stamp. 
b) Yes, provided a statute gives Adina a conditional right to intervene. 
c) No, unless a statue gives Adina an unconditional right to intervene. 
d) No, unless she receives the court's permission to intervene. 

QUESTIONS 12-17 ARE BASED ON THE FOLLOWING FACTS

Agnes (a citizen of Tennessee) buys a new boat, and hires Belinda (a citizen of North Carolina) to transport it to a lake house that Agnes owns in North Carolina. While Belinda is en route, she in involved in a collision with Craig (a citizen of North Carolina), who is driving a brand new Cadillac. Craig and Belinda both sustain serious injuries in the collision, and both of their vehicles, along with the boat, are totaled. 

Under the applicable state law, if Belinda's negligence was responsible (solely or in part) for the accident, she would be liable both to Craig for his injuries and the damage to his car, and to Agnes for the damage to her boat. Agnes would also be vicariously liable to Craig for Belinda's negligence, because Belinda was acting as an agent for Agnes at the time of the accident. If Craig's negligence was responsible (solely or in part) for the accident, he would be liable to Belinda for her injuries and the damage to her vehicle, and to Agnes for the damage to her boat. The law also provides for a right of contribution among joint tortfeasors in proportion to their respective degrees of fault. 

12. Agnes sues Craig, seeking $100,000 for the damage to her boat, which she alleges was caused by Craig's negligence. Craig denies that he was negligent, and alleges that the accident was caused instead by Belinda's negligence. Craig impleads Belinda as a third-party defendant, seeking $70,000 for his personal injuries and the damage to his car. Is joinder of Belinda proper?

a) No, because Craig does not seek more than $75,000 in damages from Belinda. 
b) No, because Craig and Belinda are both citizens of North Carolina. 
* c) No, because Craig's claim is not a proper basis for impleader under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. 
d) Yes, because Craig's claim arises from the same occurrence as the underlying claim by Agnes. 

13. Assume instead that, in impleading Belinda, Craig asserts two claims against her: the first for contribution for Belinda's share of liability to Agnes for the damage to her boat, and the second for Craig's own injuries and the damage to his car. Is joinder of Belinda proper? 

a) Joinder of Belinda for the contribution claim is proper, but joinder of the claim for Craig's own injuries and the damage to his car is improper.  
b) Joinder of both claims is proper, but the court would lack subject matter jurisdiction over both claims, because Craig & Belinda are both citizens of North Carolina.  
c) Joinder of both claims is proper, but the court would have subject matter jurisdiction only over the contribution claim, not the claim for Craig's own injuries and the damage to his car. 
* d) Joinder of both claims is proper, and the court would have subject matter jurisdiction over both claims. 

THE FOLLOWING ADDITIONAL FACTS APPLY TO QUESTIONS 14 & 15:
Instead of Agnes initiating the lawsuit, Craig does so by suing Agnes for his personal injuries and the damage to his car. Assume that he seeks more than $75,000 in damages. 

14. Because Craig prefers to sue in federal court, he opts not to join Belinda as a co-defendant. Which of the following is true?
a) The court should dismiss the suit based on Rule 19, because Belinda is a party who must be joined if feasible, but her joinder is not feasible because it would destroy complete diversity. 
b) Belinda may intervene as a plaintiff to assert claims against Craig for her injuries and the damage to her vehicle. 
c) Both a and b.
* d) Neither a nor b. 

15. Rather than assert a counterclaim against Craig in this action, Agnes prefers to wait and see what happens in Craig's suit, and then bring her own suit in another forum. May she do so?
a) No, regardless of the outcome in Craig's suit. 
* b) No, if Agnes does not bring her counterclaim in this action she’ll be precluded from doing so in another suit later on.
c) Yes, because every party has the right to choose the forum in which to bring their own claims. 
d) Yes, because Belinda is a necessary party on any claim by Agnes for damage to her boat, but joinder of Belinda would deprive the federal court of diversity jurisdiction. 

THE FOLLOWING ADDITIONAL FACTS APPLY TO QUESTIONS 16 & 17:
Based on an investigation following the accident, Craig concludes that the the brakes in his Cadillac were defective, and that this defect contributed to the accident. Under the applicable state law, General Motors (a Delaware corporation with its principal place of business is Michigan), which manufactured the car, is liable for any injuries or damage caused by the defect. When Craig files his suit, he names General Motors as a co-defendant along with Agnes. 

16. May Agnes assert claims against General Motors for contribution on Craig's claim, and for the damage to Agnes's boat?
* a) Agnes may assert both claims in this action, but is not required to. 
b) Agnes must assert both claims in this action, and if she does not she will be precluded from doing so in a later suit. 
c) Agnes must assert her claim for contribution in this action, but may assert her claim for damage to her boat either in this action or in a later suit. 
d) Agnes may not assert either claim in this action. 

17. May Belinda intervene as a plaintiff to assert her own claims against General Motors seeking $80,000 for personal injuries and damage to her vehicle? 
a) No, because she and Craig are both citizens of North Carolina. 
b) No, because she was a necessary party under Rule 19 and her failure to join the suit at the outset precludes her from intervening now.
c) Yes, without requiring the court's permission. 
* d) Yes, if she obtains the court’s permission. 

QUESTIONS 18, 19, & 20 ARE BASED ON THE FOLLOWING FACTS:

Arnold (a citizen of California) visits his primary care physician, Dr. Bonebreaker (also a citizen of California) for a routine checkup. Dr. Bonebreaker is concerned that a growth on Arnold's shoulder may be cancerous. She refers Arnold to the Cancer Clinic, located in Nevada, for a consultation with Dr. Derma, a prominent skin cancer specialist employed by the Clinic. Dr. Derma performs a biopsy, which reveals that the growth is benign. A very relieved Arnold returns home to California. A few days later, he develops a noticeable and painful inflammation in his shoulder, and a high fever. He again visits Dr. Bonebreaker, who determines that the site of the biopsy has become infected. Prescribing an antibiotic, Dr. Bonebreaker assures Arnold that this is not uncommon after a biopsy, and that the problem should subside in a few days. Two weeks later, the swelling and fever having grown worse, Arnold is rushed to the hospital where he is treated for a nearly-fatal staph infection that has spread to his heart and lungs. 

18. Arnold brings a medical malpractice suit against the Cancer Clinic (incorporated and having its sole place of business in Nevada), alleging that the infection resulted from negligent treatment by the Clinic's employee, Dr. Derma. Arnold seeks a total of $1 million in compensatory and punitive damages. The Clinic contends that Dr. Bonebreaker was negligent in misdiagnosing the infection and failing to prescribe a more aggressive treatment, and that Bonebreaker was thus to blame for the harm Arnold suffered. The Clinic impleads Dr. Bonebreaker, asserting a claim for contribution in the event that the Clinic is found liable. Does the court have jurisdiction over the claims against the Clinic and Dr. Bonebreaker?

a) No, because Arnold and Bonebreaker are both citizens of California. 
b) No, because supplemental jurisdiction is not available over a third-party claim. 
* c) Yes, regardless of the amount the Clinic seeks in contribution from Bonebreaker. 
d) Yes, but only if the Clinic seeks more than $75,000 in contribution from Bonebreaker.

19. Arnold owes Dr. Bonebreaker $5000 for past medical treatment unrelated to the growth and infection. Arnold has refused to pay that bill, because he believes Dr. Bonebreaker was partly responsible for the infection. Assume that the Clinic has properly impleaded Bonebreaker as a third-party defendant in Arnold's suit. May Dr. Bonebreaker assert a claim against Arnold for the unpaid medical bill (assume that Bonebreaker has no other claim against Arnold)?
a) Yes, because a third-party defendant may assert any claim it has against the plaintiff, and the court may exercise supplemental jurisdiction over all such claims.  
b) Yes, but only if Arnold asserts a claim in the same action against Bonebreaker for malpractice related to the infection. 
c) No, because even though the joinder rules permit Bonebreaker to assert the claim, the court would lack subject matter jurisdiction. 
*d) No, because the joinder rules do not permit Bonebreaker to assert the claim, and because the court would lack subject matter jurisdiction. 

20. Unhappy with the treatment he received at the Clinic, Arnold visits a website called RateYourDoctor.com, leaving a comment stating that “The Cancer Clinic's medical staff are a bunch of quacks. Thanks to their incompetence, I contracted a serious infection and nearly died. Don't go there for treatment unless you want to walk out worse off than when you walked in.” Concerned about the impact of Arnold’s comment on its reputation, the Clinic asserts a counterclaim for commercial disparagement (similar to defamation) against Arnold in his medical malpractice suit. Does the court have subject matter jurisdiction over this counterclaim?
a) Yes, because once a court has subject matter jurisdiction over a claim between two parties, it may exercise supplemental jurisdiction over any other claims between the same two parties. 
b) No, unless the clinic seeks more than $75,000 in damages on its counterclaim. 
* c) Yes, regardless of the amount the Clinic seeks on its counterclaim, because it involves facts about the treatment Arnold received at the Clinic, which is also the foundation of Arnold's malpractice claim. 
d) No, because the counterclaim is based on a different occurrence than the malpractice claim.  
