Elon University School of Law Civil Procedure II (Fink)

Quiz: Pleadings, Choice of Law, Summary Judgment, & Preclusion 

Instructions: This is a closed-book quiz. A selection of pertinent statutes and Federal Rules of Civil Procedure is provided to you with this quiz. You may not consult any other books, notes, or materials. For each question, select the best response based on the information contained in the question. In each question, unless the question indicates otherwise, you should assume that the case is in federal court, and that the court has personal and subject-matter jurisdiction. 


THE FOLLOWING FACTS APPLY TO QUESTIONS 1, 2, & 3:

Priscilla rented a power drill from Dale's Rent-a-Tool. The drill had a label indicating that it was manufactured by Drillum, Inc. Priscilla sued Dale's and Drillum, seeking $100,000 in damages, for injuries she sustained when the drill bit came loose and lodged in her eye. In its answer, Drillum admits that it manufactured the drill, but denies it was defective, and asserts that the injury resulted from Priscilla's own negligence. Six months later, in the course of discovery, Drillum's expert examines the drill and concludes that it was not manufactured by Drillum. 

1. Drillum files a motion for leave to amend its answer to deny the allegation that it manufactured the drill. The statute of limitations on Priscilla's claims has not yet run. Priscilla opposes the motion. How should the court rule?

A. Allow the amendment, because Drillum, Inc. could have amended as a matter of course anyway, as Priscilla had not filed any responsive pleading to Drillum’s answer.
B. Allow the amendment, provided the court is persuaded that Drillum has a good faith basis for its denial.
C. Deny the amendment, because once Drillum admitted the allegation, it was estopped from subsequently denying it in any amended pleading.
D. Deny the amendment, because discovery is already underway.

CORRECT ANSWER IS B: Absent prejudice to Priscilla, or bad faith on the part of Drillum, the court should grant leave to amend. Leave is required, because Drillum is seeking to amend its answer, to which no responsive pleading is required, and the time for amendment without leave has passed. Priscilla will not be prejudiced, because the limitations period on her claims has not yet run, so she could still join another defendant (assuming Drillum really didn’t manufacture the drill). 

2. Another two months later, after the statute of limitations on any claims arising out of the accident has run, Priscilla moves to amend her complaint to assert an additional claim against Dale's Rent-a-Tool for fraud, alleging that they deliberately mislabeled the drill as a Drillum product, when in fact Dale's knew it was made by Drecko, a company that produces cheap, shoddy knock-offs of brand-name tools. If Dale's opposes the motion to amend, how should the court rule?

A. Deny leave to amend, because the statute of limitations has run.
B. Deny leave to amend, because the proposed amendment is inconsistent with Priscilla’s initial claim that Drillum, Inc. manufactured the drill.
C. Grant leave to amend, because Dale’s Rent-a-Tool will not be unfairly prejudiced.
D. Grant leave to amend, because a plaintiff may always freely amend to assert a new legal theory of recovery against an existing defendant.

CORRECT ANSWER IS C: Priscilla’s new claim against Drillum arises out of the same transaction or occurrence as her original claim, and will therefore relate back to the original date of filing of the suit against Dale’s Rent-a-Tool. Under the Federal Rules, a party may plead factually or legally inconsistent theories, so long as the party does so in good faith, which appears to be the case here.

3. Priscilla also moves to amend her complaint to name Drecko as a defendant in place of Drillum on her defective product claim. The statute of limitations on any claims arising from the accident has run. How should the court rule?

A. Deny leave to amend, because the claim is barred by the statute of limitations. 
B. Deny leave to amend, because amendments to name a new party are never permitted after a suit has been filed. 
C. Grant leave to amend, if the court concludes that Priscilla made a mistake about the identity of the drill's manufacturer, that Drecko knew about the suit when it was filed, and that Drecko knew it was their drill that caused Priscilla's injury. 
D. Grant leave to amend, regardless of what Drecko knew, because otherwise Priscilla would be unfairly left without a remedy. 

CORRECT ANSWER IS C. 

4. Pauline (NJ) sues Darla (PA) in federal court in Pennsylvania, asserting a claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress and seeking $76,000 in damages, based on Darla's allegedly telling Pauline's boyfriend Harold (NJ) that Pauline was cheating on him, as a result of which Harold broke up with Pauline. If Darla files timely motions under Rule 12, which of the following motions in most likely to succeed?

A. Motion to dismiss under under Rule 12(b)(1), because a federal court lacks subject-matter jurisdiction over an emotional distress claim arising under state law.
B. Motion to dismiss under Rule 12(b)(2), because the break-up between Pauline and Harold occurred in NJ, where Darla lacks minimum contacts.
C. Motion to dismiss under Rule 12(b)(6), if PA law does not recognize claims for intentional infliction of emotional distress for a third-party’s interference with a romantic relationship.
D. Motion to dismiss under Rule 12(b)(7), because Pauline failed to join Harold as a necessary party.

CORRECT ANSWER IS C: If PA law does not recognize claims of this type, then Pauline’s complaint fails to state a claim for which relief may be granted, and should be dismissed on a Rule 12(b)(6) motion. Harold is not a necessary party; at most, he might be a joint tortfeaser. Under the stated facts, the court would have diversity jurisdiction and personal jurisdiction over Nancy (assuming the complaint stated a legally valid claim). 

5. Phyllis (NC) enters into a deal with Drake (SC) to purchase and develop a parcel of land. While pitching the deal, Drake told Phyllis that his engineer had inspected the parcel and confirmed that it is suitable for development. In fact, Drake’s engineer had reported that the land was unstable and unsuitable for development. Sure enough, after construction is complete, the building collapses as a result of the unstable land, rendering the property worthless. Phyllis sues Drake in federal court for fraud, seeking $76,000 and alleging as follows: “Plaintiff entered into the land deal based upon Defendant’s fraudulent misrepresentations. As a result, Plaintiff has lost the entire amount of her investment.” If Drake moves to dismiss, how should the court rule?

A. Grant the motion, because it is implausible that Phyllis would have entered into the deal in reliance on Drake’s representations without asking to see the engineer’s report.
B. Grant the motion, because Phyllis has failed to provide sufficient detail in support of her fraud claim.
C. Deny the motion, because the complaint contains a short and plain statement of the grounds for relief.
D. Deny the motion, because Phyllis may be able to prove some set of facts entitling her to relief.

CORRECT ANSWER IS B: While the general rule is that a complaint need only provide a “short and plain statement”, Rule 9 requires that allegations of fraud be stated with specificity. Merely alleging that the defendant made an unspecified “fraudulent misrepresentation” is not sufficient. The plaintiff must identify what the allegedly fraudulent statements were. 


THE FOLLOWING FACTS APPLY TO QUESTIONS 6 & 7:

Jeffrey, Walter, & Donny are bowling. In the course of the game, Donny carelessly lets go of his ball during his backswing, sending it flying into Walter, who is knocked over. Walter lands with his head coming down on Jeffrey's foot. Walter sustains a concussion and Jeffrey a broken toe. Jeffrey sues Donny in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of California. The relevant portions of Jeffrey's complaint read as follows: 

¶1. Plaintiff is a resident and citizen of the State of California. Defendant is a resident and citizen of the State of Nevada. The amount in controversy in this action exceeds the amount specified under 28 USC § 1332. 

¶2. Venue is proper in this district because a substantial part of the events giving rise to Plaintiff's claims occurred within this district. 

¶3. On August 15, 2006, at the Lebowski Lanes bowling alley, the Defendant negligently threw a bowling ball at Walter, causing Walter to fall and land on Plaintiff's foot. 

¶43. As a result of the Defendant's actions, the Plaintiff suffered a broken toe and other physical injuries, incurred medical and hospital expenses totaling thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00), experienced extreme physical and mental pain and suffering, and suffered a loss of earnings. 

Wherefore, the Plaintiff Jeffrey requests judgment against the Defendant in the sum of $100,000. 

6. Donny files a timely motion under Rule 12 to dismiss for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. The court denies the motion. Donny then files his Answer, in which he asserts the following defenses and objections: lack of subject matter jurisdiction, improper venue, failure to state a claim for which relief may be granted, and insufficient service of process. Jeffrey moves to strike each of these defenses & objections. How should the court rule?

A. Grant the motion to strike in its entirety .
B. Grant the motion to strike only as to the lack of subject matter jurisdiction.
C. Grant the motion to strike as to improper venue & insufficient service of process, but deny the motion as to the remaining lack of subject matter jurisdiction and failure to state a claim.
D. Deny the motion to strike in its entirety .

CORRECT ANSWER IS C: By failing to include objections to venue and service of process in his Rule 12 motion, Donny waived those objections, per Rule 12(h)(1). The remaining defenses (lack of subject matter jurisdiction and failure to state a claim) are never waived and it is proper for the defendant to assert them in the answer. 

7. Assume that, instead of filing the Motion to Dismiss and subsequent Answer described in the previous question, Donny files a motion to dismiss under Rule 12(b)(6), asserting that Jeffrey's complaint is insufficient to state a claim for which relief may be granted. Jeffrey opposes the motion. How should the court rule?

A. Grant the motion and dismiss the suit, because the allegations in the complaint do not describe in sufficient detail what Donny did that was negligent.
B. Grant the motion and dismiss the suit, because the allegations in the complaint do not sufficiently establish the basis for the amount of damages Jeffrey seeks.
C. Grant the motion and dismiss the suit, because ¶ 3 of the complaint sets forth compound allegations of fact and law.
D. Deny the motion and allow the suit to go forward.

CORRECT ANSWER IS D: The allegations in the complaint are sufficient, on their face, to state a claim for negligence. Even under Twombly and Iqbal, it is unlikely that a court would require a plaintiff to plead ordinary negligence with greater specificity. 

8. Gene sues his employer, Norman, alleging that he was fired in violation of the terms of his employment contract. Norman moves for summary judgment, supporting his motion with affidavits, deposition testimony, and documentary evidence that Norman contends show there is no genuine dispute of material fact surrounding the circumstances of Gene's firing, and that Norman is entitled to judgment in his favor as a matter of law because the facts do not establish any contractual breach. What must Gene do to avoid summary judgment in favor of Norman :
 
A. Produce evidence in admissible form showing the existence of a genuine issue of material fact regarding the discharge.
B. Point to the parts of Gene's pleadings that allege a breach of contract. 
C. Direct the court to supporting evidence already in the record supporting a reasonable inference in Gene's favor. 
D. Direct the court's attention to evidence already in the record, or additional evidence provided in response to the summary judgment motion, that would, if offered in admissible form at trial, support a reasonable inference in Gene's favor.

CORRECT ANSWER IS D. The plaintiff, as the party bearing the burden of proof at trial, has the burden of production to establish a genuine issue of material fact precluding summary judgment. The evidence offered in opposition to summary judgment need not be in a form admissible at trial, as long as the party offering it will be able to present it in admissible form if and when the case comes to trial.

9. Daniel hires Bill to install a ceiling fan in his home. A few weeks after Bill completes the job, the ceiling fan comes loose and falls down, hitting and injuring Daniel, who was unlucky enough to be standing underneath it at the time. Daniel sues Bill in federal court for negligence. After the parties have conducted discovery, Bill moves for summary judgment, supporting his motion with an affidavit from an expert engineer who opines (based on his examination) that the fan was correctly designed and installed, but that the ceiling material was weaked as a result of internal decay not visible to Bill at the time he installed the fan. Daniel responds, opposing Bill's motion for summary judgment and seeking summary judgment in his own favor. In support, Daniel offers an affidavit from his own expert who says that he examined the ceiling and found no decay, and that the fan had merely been attached to the sheet rock, and not to a ceiling beam, as would have been appropriate given the weight of the fan. Daniel's expert further opines that, had there been decay sufficient to weaken the ceiling, a competent fan installer would have identified it. How should the court rule?
A. Grant Daniel's motion, if the court determines that his expert is more credible. 
B. Grant Bill's motion, if the court determines that his expert is more credible. 
C. Deny both motions, because neither is adequately supported. 
D. Deny both motions, because there is a genuine issue of material fact.

CORRECT ANSWER IS D. On a motion for summary judgment, the court must assess the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. The court may not make credibility determinations or otherwise weigh the evidence. If the parties offer competing evidence on an issue of material fact, summary judgment is inappropriate.

10. Esperanza, a delivery driver for Dreadful Distress Corp., sues in California state court under a state statute providing that an employer must reimburse its employees for any necessary expenses the employees incur in the course of their employment. Dreadful Distress defends on the ground that Esperanza is not an employee, but an independent contractor, and therefore not covered by the statute. The parties file motions for partial summary judgment on the issue of employee status, and the court grants partial summary judgment on that issue in favor of Esperanza, ruling that she is an employee. The case then proceeds to trial, at the conclusion of which the judge rules in favor of Esperanza. In his written decision, the judge opines that the statute would have applied even if Esperanza were an independent contractor. 

Gary, a bicycle messenger, then brings a lawsuit against Dreadful Distress, for injuries he sustained when Esperanza, who was driving her Dreadful Distress truck at the time, cut Gary off at an intersection and knocked him off his bike. Gary asserts that Dreadful Distress is vicariously liable as Esperanza's employer. Gary argues that Dreadful Distress is precluded from relitigating the issue of Esperanza's employee status, based on the decision in the Esperanza v. Dreadful Distress case. How should the court rule?

A. Deny the motion, because Gary was not a party to the previous suit. 
B. Deny the motion, because Gary's tort claim arises out of a separate transaction from Esperanza's employment claim. 
C. Deny the motion, because the prior judgment was not conclusive on the employment status issue. 
D. Grant the motion, because the issue is identical, Gary could not have joined in the prior lawsuit, and Dreadful Distress fully litigated the employment status issue in the prior case.

CORRECT ANSWER IS C. Issue preclusion applies only where the issue was actually litigated and decided, and was necessary to the final judgment in the prior case. Here, even though the parties litigated the employment status issue, and the court actually decided it in favor of Esperanza, that decision turned out not to be essential to the final judgment in that case, because the court opined that the outcome would have been the same even if Esperanza was a contractor. Consequently, Gary may not rely on the prior case for issue preclusion.


THE FOLLOWING FACTS APPLY TO QUESTIONS 11 & 12:

Paulson, an investment banker, has two clients, Bernanke and Greenspan. He invests money from each client in a highly speculative venture involving dental redemption default swaps, which insure against the risk of non-payment by the tooth fairy. The investment goes sour when the tooth fairy defaults on millions of sub-prime molar accounts, and Bernanke and Greenspan lose all their savings. Bernanke sues Paulson for breach of fiduciary duty. When Paulson fails to appear or file any response, Bernanke obtains a default judgment for the full amount of his claim. 

11. After obtaining the default judgment, Bernanke realizes that he could recover additional damages and attorney fees if he also sued Paulson under the Financial Loss Offset & Securities Swindle ("FLOSS") Act, a federal statute. Consequently, Bernanke files a new suit against Paulson, asserting a FLOSS Act claim. This time, Paulson enters an appearance and files an Answer denying the allegations. Paulson then files a motion for summary judgment, attaching a copy of the default judgment from Bernanke's previous suit, and asserts that the FLOSS Act claim must be dismissed on the basis of claim preclusion. How should the court rule?

A. Grant the motion, because the FLOSS Act claim arises from the same transaction that gave rise to the fiduciary duty claim in the previous suit. 
B. Deny the motion, because the default judgment in the first suit was not a final judgment on the merits. 
C. Deny the motion, because Paulson's default in the first suit precludes him from denying liability for any claims arising out of the transaction giving rise to the fiduciary duty claim in that suit. 
D. Deny the motion, because claim preclusion does not apply where the plaintiff asserted only state-law claims in the prior suit and asserts only federal-law claims in the subsequent suit.

CORRECT ANSWER IS A.

12. Greenspan brings his own suit against Paulson, asserting a claim for breach of fiduciary duty and a claim under the FLOSS Act. Which of the following is correct: 
A. The court should not dismiss either claim on claim preclusion grounds, and Greenspan may assert issue preclusion against Paulson on the issue of Paulson's liability for fiduciary breach, based on the final judgment in Bernanke's lawsuit. 
B. The court should not dismiss either claim on claim preclusion grounds, and Greensplan may not assert issue preclusion on any issue, based on the final judgment in Bernanke's lawsuit. 
C. The court should dismiss Greenspan's suit in its entirety on claim preclusion grounds, because he could have joined as a co-plaintiff in Bernanke's lawsuit.
D. The court should dismiss Greenspan's fiduciary duty claim on claim preclusion grounds, because it is the same as Bernanke's claim in the first suit, but should not dismiss the FLOSS Act claim, because Bernanke did not assert that claim in the first suit. .

CORRECT ANSWER IS B. A default judgment (assuming the court had jurisdiction) is treated as a final judgment on the merits for claim preclusion purposes. However, two parties with claims against the same defendant are not normally required to bring their claims as co-plaintiffs in the same action, so a final judgment on the merits in an action by one plaintiff will not preclude a subsequent action by the other plaintiff. Issue preclusion applies only to issues that were actually litigated and essential to the judgment in the prior suit. Because the first case was decided against Paulson on a default judgment, the issues going to his liability were not actually litigated, so there can be no issue preclusion based on the default judgment.


13. Rich, a citizen of New Jersey, sued Heavenly Rest Cemetary, located in Pennsylvania, in federal court, for breach of contract, alleging that Heavenly Rest had failed to maintain the ivy on his parent's graves, as specified in a perpetual care contract. After a lengthy trial, the jury returned a verdict in favor of Heavenly Rest. Rich then moved to set aside the jury verdict and dismiss the case for lack of subject-matter jurisdiction, because Rich had only sought $50,000 in total damages. The court granted that motion and dismissed the case, a decision that was affirmed on appeal. 

Rich then filed a new action against Heavenly Rest in Pennsylvania federal court, asserting the same breach of contract claim, as well as a claim based on a federal consumer protection statute. Heavenly Rest moved for summary judgment on grounds of claim preclusion, based on the prior federal action. How should the court rule? 
A. Grant the motion, because the case was dismissed only after a decision on the merits in favor of Heavenly Rest, and Rich may not avoid the consequences by dismissing his own action on jurisdictional grounds. 
B. Grant the motion, because Rich could have asserted his federal statutory claim in the previous action and the court would then have had subject-matter jurisdiction. 
C. Deny the motion, because the first suit did not result in a valid, final judgment on the merits. 
D. Deny the motion, because the federal statutory claim is a different claim than the one Rich asserted in the first suit. 

CORRECT ANSWER IS C. An objection based on lack of subject matter jurisdiction is never waived, and may be asserted at any time by either party. Dismissal for lack of subject matter jurisdiction is not a decision on the merits for claim preclusion purposes, even if the dismissal comes only after the court has actually decided the case on the merits, because that decision will be void absent subject matter jurisdiction. The fact that Rich could have asserted a federal statutory claim, and thus brought the entire case within federal subject matter jurisdiction, does not alter the analysis in this case.

14. Mrs. Hubbard, a resident of Tacoma, Washington, receives an unsolicited visit at her home from a sales representative of the International Shoe Company (based in St. Louis, Missouri). Impressed by his sales pitch, she orders a pair of shoes, paying with a check that she gives to the salesman. After the salesman sends the order and the check to International Shoe's headquarters in Missouris, the company ships the shoes to Mrs. Hubbard by mail to her home. Unfortunately, Mrs. Hubbard's bank account, like her cupboard, is bare, and her check bounces. International Shoe brings a suit against Mrs. Hubbard in Missouri state court, seeking payment of $125 (the cost of the shoes plus shipping and handling). When Mrs. Hubbard fails to appear, the court enters a default judgment in favor of International Shoe. Seeking to collect on its judgment, International Shoe then brings an action in Washington State court. This time, Mrs. Hubbard, accompanied by a legal aid attorney, does appear. If she wishes to contest the action, what is her best argument?

A. The shoes did not conform to the description in the catalog, and caused Mrs. Hubbard to grow bunions on her feet, and under Washington State law she is not obligated to pay for them. 
B. The Missouri court lacked personal jurisdiction over Mrs. Hubbard, because she did not have minimum contacts with that state.
C. The Washington court should dismiss the action, based on claim preclusion, because it raises the same claim that was already litigated and resulted in a final judgment on the merits in the previous Missouri action. 
D. Full faith and credit does not apply to default judgments. 

CORRECT ANSWER IS B. Under the stated facts, Mrs. Hubbard most likely is not subject to personal jurisdiction in Missouri. Consequently, the Washington State court is not obligated to give the Missouri judgment preclusive effect. Answer C correctly states the basic rule for claim preclusion, but is wrong here because the lack of jurisdiction over Mrs. Hubbard renders the Missouri judgment invalid. Answers A & D are wrong, because, absent any defect in jurisdiction or service of process, a default judgment is entitled to Full Faith and Credit, and the losing party may not challenge that prior judgment on the merits in a subsequent action. 

15. Tompkins sues the Erie Railroad, seeking damages for injuries Tompkins sustained when he was hit by one of Erie's trains as he was walking through the Railroad's yards in Pennsylvania. Tompkins files his suit in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York, which has jurisdiction based on diversity of citizenship. Tompkins serves a copy of his complaint and summons by mailing them to Erie's corporate offices in New York City, as authorized under Rule 4(c) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. Erie moves to dismiss for improper service, arguing that, under the New York State rules of procedure, the only valid means of service on a corporate defendant is for a Sheriff's deputy to personally hand a copy of the complaint and summons, wrapped in a copy of the NY Post, to a corporate officer. How should the court rule?
A. Grant the motion, because in a diversity suit a federal court must follow the procedural rules of the state within which it sits.
B. Grant the motion, if NY's rule for service is based on a strong state policy in favor of protecting against frivilous lawsuits. 
C. Deny the motion, if NY's choice of law rules would determine that Pennsylvania law, not New York law, governs the suit.
D. Deny the motion, assuming Rule 4(c) is valid under the Rules Enabling Act. 

CORRECT ANSWER IS D. Because there is an applicable FRCP provision, the starting point for the analysis follows Hanna. Here, there is a direct conflict between FRCP and state law: Rule 4 permits service by mail, while state law requires personal service in a ridiculous manner. As long as Rule 4 is valid under the REA -- i.e. it arguably regulates procedure -- the federal court will follow the federal rule, regardless of any state policy interest. 
