Civil Procedure				              
Elon University School of Law
Professor Fink
Practice Exam Questions
These Facts Apply to All Questions:
Peter Parker, a lifelong resident of Pennsylvania, was reviewing his credit card bill and noticed a $100 charge for a subscription to the Daily Bugle, a newspaper published in New York (where it is incorporated and has its sole place of business). Parker had never subscribed to the Daily Bugle, and never received any copies of the paper. However, he recalled that, a few months earlier, he had visited the Bugle’s website and ordered a t-shirt with the paper’s stylish logo (pictured below). 

After reading reports of other people similarly being improperly billed for Bugle subscriptions, Parker suspected that he was the victim of an elaborate scam. After further investigation, Parker concluded that the scam was concocted by J. Jonah Jameson (domiciled in New York), the Bugle’s business manager. Jameson did so as a way to artificially inflate the paper’s circulation figures, on which his salary was based. 
Parker decides to sue. He consults with a lawyer who prepares a complaint asserting two claims against the Bugle and Jameson:
1) Violation of the Credit Card Protection Act (CCPA), a federal statute; and 
2) Fraud under state law.
On the CCPA claim, the complaint seeks damages in the amount of $300 (i.e. three times the amount of the fraudulent charge), as provided under the statute. On the fraud claim, the complaint seeks compensatory damages of $100, plus $10,000 in punitive damages (the maximum amount recoverable under the applicable state law). 

Question 1
Parker bring his suit in a New York state court. May the defendants remove the suit to federal court? 
Question 2
Regardless of your answer to the previous question, assume Parker brings his suit in federal court. For each of the following additional claims, explain (i) whether joinder would be proper, and (ii) whether the federal court would have subject matter jurisdiction:
a) A claim by Betty Brant (a citizen of New Jersey), joining in the suit as a co-plaintiff against the Bugle, alleging that she was fired from her job at the Bugle in violation of a state whistleblower statute after threatening to expose the credit card scam to state authorities. She seeks damages equal to one year’s salary ($50,000), the maximum permitted under the statute. 
b) A claim by the Bugle against Jameson, alleging that Jameson breached his employment contract by concocting the scheme to boost his salary through artificially inflated circulation figures, and seeking recovery of $50,000 in excess salary that Jameson received. 
c) A claim by Parker against the Bugle, alleging that the Bugle t-shirt Parker bought was treated with toxic chemicals that caused a severe skin condition, for which Parker seeks a total of $80,000 in compensatory and punitive damages. 
d) A claim by the Bugle against ZF Corp. (incorporated and having its principal place of business in New York), which manufactured the Bugle t-shirts, for indemnification on Parker’s personal injury claim (assume, regardless of your answer to the previous question, that Parker’s claim is properly joined). 

Model Answers
Question 1
A defendant may  (subject to certain conditions and exceptions) remove a suit from state court to federal court if the action is within the original jurisdiction of the federal district courts. Sec. 1441(a). A suit is removable only if there is federal subject matter jurisdiction over each claim in the suit. Subject matter jurisdiction must be based on the complaint itself, not on any defenses or counterclaims. 
Parker's Credit Card Protection Act (CCPA) claim is removable based on federal question jurisdiction. The CCPA is a federal statute that provides a remedy for fraudulent credit card charges. Because federal law creates the cause of action, there is federal question jurisdiction under sec. 1331.   
There is no federal question jurisdiction over Parker's fraud claim, which is based on state law and raises no apparent issue of federal law. Nor would the federal court have diversity jurisdiction over that claim. 
Diversity jurisdiction under sec. 1332 requires (1) a suit between citizens of different states, and (2) an amount in controversty exceeding $75,000. Jurisdiction under sec. 1332 requires complete diversity of citizenship, i.e. no common citizenship between any plaintiff and any defendant. 
An individual's state of citizenship is based on domicile, i.e. the state where the individual resides and intends to remain or return indefinitely. Parker is a lifelong resident of Pennsylvania, and there is no indication that he intends to move, so he is a citizen of PA. The facts state that Jameson is domiciled in New York. A corporation is a citizen of both its state of incorporation and its principal place of business. The Bugle is incorporated and has its principal place of business in New York. Accordingly, there is complete diversity of citizenship between the plaintiff (PA) and both defendants (NY). 
However, aggregating the damages Parker seeks under his federal and state claims, the amount in controversy is just over $10,000. Consequently, the federal court would not have diversity jurisdiction over Parker's state-law fraud claim. 
But the federal court may exercise supplemental jurisdiction over the fraud claim in tandem with the CCPA claim. Supplemental jurisdiction permits a federal court to hear an otherwise non-jurisdictional claim where it forms part of the same constitutional case or controversy as a claim over which the federal court has subject matter jurisdiction. Sec. 1367(a). This requirement is satisfied where the claims share a common nucleus of operative fact (CNOF). Here, Parker's federal CCPA claim and his state fraud claim are based on the same underlying facts, i.e. the alleged fraudulent charge to his credit card. While sec. 1367(b) restricts the exercise of supplemental jurisdiction over certain claims, that restriction does not apply unless diversity is the sole basis for the federal court's original jurisiction. Because Parker asserts a federal CCPA claim here, sec. 1367(b) does not apply, and the court may exercise supplemental jurisdiction over the fraud claim. 
Where the sole basis for federal SMJ is diversity, the forum defendant rule prohibits removal if any defendant is a citizen of the state in which the action was originally filed. Sec. 1441(b). In this case, both defendants are citizens of NY, where Parker filed his suit in state court. However, since removal here is based on federal question and supplemental jurisdiction, the forum defendant rule does not prevent removal. Assuming both defendants join in or consent to removal, and file a timely notice of removal (sec. 1446), removal will be proper. 
Joinder of the Bugle and Jameson as co-defendants is also be proper. Rule 20 permits joinder of co-defendants where the claims against them (1) arise from the same transaction or occurrence (or series thereof), and (2) share a common question of law or fact. Here, Parker's claims against the two defendants arise from the same transaction or occurrence, i.e. the unauthorized charge against his credit card. There will be common questions regarding the circumstances of that charge and whether it was indeed unauthorized. Accordingly, joinder under Rule 20 is proper. 
Question 2
A. Brant v. Bugle (wrongful discharge)
It is likely that Brant may join as a co-plaintiff against the Bugle; if so, the court could exercise supplemental jurisdiction over her claim. 
Rule 20 permits co-plaintiffs to join in the same suit if their claims (1) arise out of the same transaction or occurrence (or series thereof), and (2) share a common question of law or fact. Claims will usually be regarded as arising from the same T/O where they are logically related factually or legally, so that it makes sensre to try them together. Under a broad view, Brant's claim and Parker's claim may be regarded as arising from the same sequence of events surrounding the alleged unauthorized charges. The claims are logically related, in the sense that Brant alleges she was fired for blowing the whistle on the same fraudulent scheme that forms the basis for Parker's claims. Under a narrower view, the claims are logically independent, in the sense that the Bugle's liability to Brant does not depend, legally or factually, on liability to Parker (and vice versa). The claims most likely will share common questions of fact concerning the alleged unauthorized charges. 
Assuming the court agrees that joinder is proper under Rule 20, the court may exercise jurisdiction over Brant's claim. The court would not have diversity jurisdiction over that claim, because the amount in controversy on Brant's claim is only $50,000. However, the court may exercise supplemental jurisdiction. Brant's claim and Parker's claims share a CNOF, i.e. the facts pertaining to the fraudulent credit card charges. The restriction under sec. 1367(b) does not apply, because original jurisdiction is based on a federal question (Parker's CCPA claim). Even if sec. 1367(b) did apply, joinder of Brant and exercise of supplemental jurisdiction over her claim would not destroy complete diversity. Brant is a citizen of NJ, while the two defendants are citizens of NY. 
B. Bugle v. Jameson (breach of contract)
Rule 13(g) permits claims between co-parties if those claims arise from the same transaction or occurrence that is the subject of the original action. Here, the Bugle and Jameson are co-defendants. The Bugle's claim against Jameson is logically related to Parker's original claims against the defendants: the claims all arise from the same alleged conduct by Jameson concerning the unauthorized credit card charges. 
The breach of contract claim arises under state law, and both the Bugle and Jameson are citizens of NY. Consequently, the court would have neither federal question nor diversity jurisdiction over the crossclaim. However, the crossclaim shares a CNOF with Parker's claims, again the facts surrounding the unauthorized charges. Sec. 1367(b) does not apply, because the court has original jurisdiction based on Parker's federal claim. Even if diversity were the sole basis for original jurisdiction, sec. 1367(b) does not apply to crossclaims between co-defendants. Consequently, the lack of diversity between the Bugle and Jameson does not preclude the exercise of supplemental jurisdiction over the crossclaim. 
C. Parker v. Bugle (personal injury)
Under Rule 18(a), a party asserting a claim may join any other claim it has against the same opposing party. Joinder of claims under Rule 18(a) does not require that the claims arise from the same T/O or share any common question of law or fact. Accordingly, having asserted the CCPA and fraud claims against the Bugle, Parker may also join his personal injury claim under Rule 18(a). 
It is unlikely that Parker's personal injury claim would be regarded as sharing a CNOF with his CCPA & fraud claims. Even though all three claims ultimately arose from Parker's visit to the Bugle website, that is too slender of a factual nexus to satisfy sec. 1367(a). The personal injury claim is based on a fundamentally distinct injury with a fundamentally distinct cause. Accordingly, while Rule 18(a) will permit joinder, Parker may bring that claim only if it independently satisfies federal subject matter jurisdiction. There is no federal question jurisdiction over the state-law personal injury claim. The sole basis for SMJ is diversity, which is satisfied here. As discussed above, Parker is a citizen of PA, while the Bugle and Jameson are citizens of NY. Adding the personal injury claim to the CCPA & fraud claims, the amount in controversy now exceeds $75,000. 
D. Bugle v. ZF Corp. (indemnification)
The Bugle's claim for indemnification asserts that, in the event the Bugle is found liable to Parker for his injuries caused by the t-shirt, ZF Corp. will be liable to the Bugle for all or part of the Bugle's liability to Parker. Rule 14(a) permits a defendant to implead a third-party defendant for such a claim. Accordingly, joinder of ZF Corp. as a third-party defendant is proper. Rule 18(a) would then permit the Bugle also to assert any other claims it may have against ZF, for instance a claim for reimbursement for t-shirts that the Bugle is unable to sell because of the defect. 
The Bugle and ZF are both citizens of NY. Consequently, regardless of the amount of indemnification to which the Bugle may be entitled, there would be no diversity jurisdiction over that claim. However, the court may exercise supplemental jurisdiction. By definition, a Rule 14(a) third-party claim shares a CNOF with the underlying plaintiff's claim. The third-party defendant's liability depends on the same facts giving rise to the primary defendant's liability to the plaintiff. If the Bugle relied on Rule 18(a) to assert some additional claim against ZF pertaining to the defective t-shirts, that would also share a CNOF with Parker's personal injury claim, since the facts about the defect would be common to these claims. Once again, even if diversity were the only basis for original jurisdiction here, sec. 1367(b) does not apply to claims by a defendant against a Rule 14 third-party defendant. Accordingly, the court may exercise supplemental jurisdiction. 
